[Java] Value Mapping feature (#479)
neo4j/driver-documentation: java-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/value-mapping.adoc

= Map query results to objects

> When xref:query-simple.adoc#read[working with values coming from a query result], you have to manually extract their properties and cast them to the relevant Java types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When xref:query-simple.adoc#read[working with values coming from a query result], you have to manually extract their properties and map them to the relevant Java types.
```

In Java `cast` usually means a very specific language feature of casting types, like `var val = (long) 0`.

Author: I understand that `type casting` is something very specific, but I'd rather use the word slightly loosely here, and avoid overloading `map` with a different meaning than what it is used for in the rest of the page. Unless you have an alternative suggestion than `map`, I prefer `cast`. The immediately subsequent example clarifies what is meant.

Reviewer: Perhaps conversion could be a decent compromise? I am just trying to make it more idiomatic for Java and to avoid possible confusion.

For example, to retrieve the `name` property as a string, you have to do `person.get("name").asString()`.

> With the driver's Value Mapping feature, you can declare a class containing the specification of the values your query is expected to return, and ask the driver to use that class to spawn new objects from a query result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the driver's Value Mapping feature, you can declare a Java `record` containing the specification of the values your query is expected to return, and ask the driver to use that class to spawn new objects from a query result.
```

Author: Is there a reason why you wanted to make this more specific here, and more generic on line 14? At this intro stage, it doesn't matter too much the technicalities of how the class is created - that is gonna be explained in the next sections.

Reviewer: The intention here was to advice users from the beginning to use Java records as this is the main and recommended type that has full feature set.

== Map driver values to a local class

> To map records into objects, define a class having the same attributes as the keys returned by the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To map records into objects, define a Java `record` having the same components as the keys returned by the query.
```

**The constructor arguments must match exactly the query return keys**, and they are case-sensitive.

> Your class should be defined as a link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/language/records.html[Java Record], and you provide its definition through the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/api/java-driver/current/org.neo4j.driver/org/neo4j/driver/Value.html#as(java.lang.Class)[`Value.as()`] method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to use link:https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/language/records.html[Java Record], but using a standard class with constructor that matches query result keys is also possible. However, not all features are supported when using standard classes. For example, using such values directly for xref:updates[database updates] is not supported.

The declared type should be provided to the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/api/java-driver/current/org.neo4j.driver/org/neo4j/driver/Value.html#as(java.lang.Class)[`Value.as()`] method for mapping purpuses.
```

    public static void main(String... args) {
        try (var driver = GraphDatabase.driver(URI, AuthTokens.basic(USER, PASSWORD))) {
            record Person(String name, Integer age) {}
            var persons = driver.executableQuery("MERGE (p:Person {name: 'Margarida', age: 29}) RETURN p")
                .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder().withDatabase("neo4j").build())
                .execute()
                .records()
                .stream()
                .map(record -> record.get("p").as(Person.class))
                .toList();
            System.out.println(persons.get(0));  // Person[name=Margarida, age=29]
        }
    }
}
----

Arguments that don't have a matching property receive a `null` value.
If the argument does not accept a `null` value (for ex. primitive types), an xref:constructors[alternative constructor] that excludes it must be available.
The example above uses the type `Integer` over the primitive `int` to account for nodes missing the `age` property.

Declaring the `record` object side-by-side with the query that uses it is a convenient way to obtain results on which it is easy to extract properties.

> However, because the class is defined in a local scope, you can't return the mapped values directly: you need to process them in the same function, or manually build another object containing the properties you want to return.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, because the class is defined in a local scope, its type can not be referenced outside the given method easily: you either need to process them in the same function or ensure it implements a type that is accessible outside the given method.
```

Another solution is to declare the `record` object as a `public` member of the class, or to create a new standalone class containing your `record` definition.

> This will make the mapped object available out of the scope of the method in which it was defined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will make the mapped object available outside the scope of the method in which it was defined.
```

[NOTE]
====
While constructor arguments with specific complex types (ex. `record Friends(List<String> names) {}`) are supported, constructor arguments with generic complex types (ex. `record Friends<T>(List<T> names) {}`) are not supported.
====

== Map properties with different names (`@Property`)

A record's property names and its query return keys can be different.
For example, consider a node `(:Person {name: "Alice"})`.
The returned keys for the query `MERGE (p:Person {name: "Alice"}) RETURN p.name` are `p.name`, even if the property name is `name`.
Similarly, for the query `MERGE (pers:Person {name: "Alice"}) RETURN pers.name`, the return keys are `pers.name`.

> You can always alter the return key with the Cypher operator link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/clauses/return/#return-column-alias[`AS`] (ex. `MERGE (p:Person {name: "Alice"}) RETURN p.name AS name`), or use the `@Property(<dbPropertyName>)` decorator to specify the property name that the following constructor argument should map to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can always alter the return key with the Cypher operator link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/clauses/return/#return-column-alias[`AS`] (ex. `MERGE (p:Person {name: "Alice"}) RETURN p.name AS name`), or use the `@Property(<dbPropertyName>)` annotation to specify the property name that the following constructor argument should map to.
```

.Map properties `name`/`age` to the object attributes `firstName`/`Years`
[source, java]
----
// import org.neo4j.driver.mapping.Property;

record Person(@Property("name") String firstName, @Property("age") Integer Years) {}
var persons = driver.executableQuery("MERGE (p:Person {name: 'Margarida', age: 29}) RETURN p")
    .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder().withDatabase("neo4j").build())
    .execute()
    .records()
    .stream()
    .map(record -> record.get("p").as(Person.class))
    .toList();
System.out.println(persons.get(0));  // Person[firstName=Margarida, Years=29]
----

== Map driver records to a local class

> The earlier examples have mapped a driver value (for example a node identified with `p`) to a class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The earlier examples have mapped a driver `Value` (for example a node identified with `p`) to a class.
```

> You can also use the mapping feature with driver records, through the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/api/java-driver/current/org.neo4j.driver/org/neo4j/driver/Record.html#as(java.lang.Class)[`Record.as()`] method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use the mapping feature with driver `Record`, through the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/api/java-driver/current/org.neo4j.driver/org/neo4j/driver/Record.html#as(java.lang.Class)[`Record.as()`] method.
```

.Return keys `name`/`p.age` are mapped to the object attributes `Name`/`Age`
[source, java]
----
// import org.neo4j.driver.mapping.Property;

record Person(String name, @Property("p.age") Integer age) {}
var persons = driver.executableQuery("""
            MERGE (p:Person {name: 'Margarida', age: 29})
            RETURN p.name AS name, p.age
        """)
    .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder().withDatabase("neo4j").build())
    .execute()
    .records()
    .stream()
    .map(record -> record.as(Person.class))
    .toList();
System.out.println(persons.get(0));  // Person[name=Margarida, age=29]
----

[#constructors]
== Work with multiple constructors

Your Java record class can contain multiple constructors.

> In that case, the driver picks one basing on the following criteria (in order of priority):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In that case, the driver picks one based on the following criteria (in order of priority):
```

Author: If the sentence was in passive form, `based on` would be correct. Because the sentence is active, `basing` is correct.

- Most matching properties
- Least mis-matching properties

At least one property must match for a constructor to work with the mapping.

.An additional constructor to handle the optional `age` property
[source, java]
----
// import org.neo4j.driver.mapping.Property;

record Person(String name, int age) {
    public Person(@Property("name") String name) {
        this(name, -1);
    }
}
var persons = driver.executableQuery("MERGE (p:Person {name: 'Axel'}) RETURN p")
    .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder().withDatabase("neo4j").build())
    .execute()
    .records()
    .stream()
    .map(record -> record.get("p").as(Person.class))
    .toList();
----

[NOTE]
====
The compiler renames constructor parameters by default, unless the compiler `-parameters` option is used or the parameters belong to the cannonical constructor of `java.lang.Record`.

In the example above, the constructor containing only `name` uses the `@Property` annotation even if it doesn't specify a different name than the constructor argument. This is needed because that is not the canonical constructor.
====

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[#updates]
```

== Insert and update data

> You can also use the mapping feature to insert or update data, by creating an instance of the `record` object that serves as a blueprint for your object and then passing it to the query as a parameter.

Reviewer: I think this should emphasise that it works for Java `record` only. No support is planned for standard classes at the moment.

For this reason, I think we should recommend using Java `record` with Value Mapping feature, see line `14`.

            record Person(String name, Integer age) {}
            var persons = driver.executableQuery("MERGE (p:Person {name: 'Margarida', age: 29}) RETURN p")
                .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder().withDatabase("neo4j").build())
                .execute()
                .records()
                .stream()
                .map(record -> record.get("p").as(Person.class))
                .toList();
            System.out.println(persons.get(0));  // Person[name=Margarida, age=29]
        }
    }
}
----

Arguments that don't have a matching property receive a `null` value.
If the argument does not accept a `null` value (for ex. primitive types), an xref:constructors[alternative constructor] that excludes it must be available.
The example above uses the type `Integer` over the primitive `int` to account for nodes missing the `age` property.

Declaring the `record` object side-by-side with the query that uses it is a convenient way to obtain results on which it is easy to extract properties.
However, because the class is defined in a local scope, its type cannot be referenced outside of the method where it is defined.

> As a result, you can't return the mapped objects directly: you need to process them in the same function or ensure it implements a type that is accessible outside of the given method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, such type may not be used as a return type of the method: you need to process the mapped value in the same function or ensure it implements a type that is accessible outside of the given method.
```

Reviewer: Just trying to make it clearer. As it is possible to actually return it.

Author: We go for `you shouldn't return the mapped object` and we have a deal? :grin: I like the conciseness and referring to the return action, rather than the function signature.

Reviewer: What if such record implements a public interface?

```java
record Person(.....) implements Employee
```

It would be perfectly fine to return something like this.
